Restructure getting-started.md and add quick start for development (#3103)
hedgedoc/hedgedoc: docs/content/dev/getting-started.md

# Getting started

To run Hedgedoc 2.0 you need three components: the backend, the frontend and the reverse proxy.

Backend and Frontend are included in the [HegdeDoc repo](https://github.com/hedgedoc/hedgedoc). The reverse proxy can be chosen by preference. For development, we
recommend caddy and the provided configuration.

## Quick guide for development setup

This describes the easiest way to start a local development environment. For other deployments follow the description
below.

> 1. Install node (at least Node 14, we recommend Node 18), [yarn](https://yarnpkg.com)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. Install Node.js (at least Node 14, we recommend Node 18) and [Yarn](https://yarnpkg.com/getting-started/install)
```

> 2. Install caddy (select one of the two options)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
2. Install Caddy (select one of the two options)
```

>    - [download](https://caddyserver.com/) and place it in `hedgedoc/dev-reverse-proxy`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   - [Download](https://caddyserver.com/) and place the `caddy` binary in `hedgedoc/dev-reverse-proxy`. Ensure it is executable with `chmod +x caddy`
```

>    - install from a distribution repository

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   - Install Caddy with you package manager
```

> 3. Clone [repo](https://github.com/hedgedoc/hedgedoc.git) and go into directory

Reviewer: ```suggestion
3. Clone [our repository](https://github.com/hedgedoc/hedgedoc.git) and go into its directory
```

     ```shell
     git clone https://github.com/hedgedoc/hedgedoc.git
     cd hedgedoc
     ```

> 4. Install dependency in repo root directory (`yarn install`)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
4. Install dependencies in repo root directory with `yarn install`
```

5. Go to `hedgedoc/commons` directory `cd ../commons`

> 6. Build commons (`yarn build`)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
6. Build the commons package with `yarn build`
```

7. Goto `hedgedoc/backend` directory `cd ../backend`

> 8. Create `.env` by `cp .env.example .env`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
8. Create the `.env` config file by copying the example: `cp .env.example .env`
```

9. Add a value to `HD_SESSION_SECRET` in the .env file

> 10. Start Backend by `yarn start:dev &`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
10. Start the backend using `yarn start:dev &`
```

11. Go to  `hedgedoc/frontend` directory `cd ../frontend`

> 12. Start Frontend by `yarn run dev:with-local-backend`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
12. Start the frontend using `yarn run dev:with-local-backend`
```

13. Go to `hedgedoc/dev-reverse-proxy` with `cd ../dev-reverse-proxy`

> 14. start Caddy `caddy run` for system-wide installation or `./caddy run` for local installation

Reviewer: ```suggestion
14. Start Caddy using `./caddy run` (when you manually downloaded the binary) or `caddy run` (when you installed Caddy via a package manager)
```

15. Use your browser to go to <http://localhost:8080>

## Preconditions

If you want to run HedgeDoc in dev mode some preconditions have to be met.

1. Make sure that NodeJS is installed. You need at least Node 14 (we recommend Node 18).

> 2. Make sure that [yarn](https://yarnpkg.com/) is installed.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
2. Make sure that [Yarn](https://yarnpkg.com/) is installed.
```

3. Clone this repo (e.g. `git clone https://github.com/hedgedoc/hedgedoc.git hedgedoc`)
4. Go into the cloned directory

## Installing the dependencies

> Because we use yarn workspaces, yarn collects the dependencies of all packages automatically in one central top-level

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Because we use Yarn workspaces, Yarn collects the dependencies of all packages automatically in one central top-level
```

> node_modules folder.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`node_modules` folder.
```

To install the dependencies execute `yarn install` at the top level of the cloned repository.
Execute this command ONLY there. There is no need to execute the install-command for every package.

> It's important to use [yarn](https://yarnpkg.com/). We don't support npm or any other package manager and using anything

Reviewer: ```suggestion
It's important to use [Yarn](https://yarnpkg.com/). We don't support `npm` or any other package manager and using anything
```

> else than yarn won't work.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
else than Yarn won't work.
```

## Build `commons` package

Some code is shared by backend and frontend. This code lives in the "commons" package and needs to be built so
frontend and backend can import it.
This only needs to be done once, except if you've changed code in the commons package.

1. Go into the `commons` directory.
2. Execute `yarn build` to build the commons package.

## Setting up the backend

> The backend can be mocked instead. For mock backend see below in frontend.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
**Note:** The backend can be mocked instead of starting it for real. See the "Mocked backend" section below.
```

1. Go into the `backend` directory.
2. Create an environment file. We recommend to use the example file by running `cp .env.example .env`
   You can modify this file according to the [configuration documentation](../config/index.md).
3. Make sure that you've set `HD_SESSION_SECRET` in your `.env` file. Otherwise, the backend won't start.
   > In dev mode you don't need a secure secret. So use any value. If you want to generate a secure session secret you

>    can generate one using e.g. `openssl rand -hex 16 | sed -E 's/(.*)/HD_SESSION_SECRET=\1/' >> .env`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   can use e.g. `openssl rand -hex 16 | sed -E 's/(.*)/HD_SESSION_SECRET=\1/' >> .env`.
```

4. Make sure that `HD_DOMAIN` in `.env` is set to the domain where Hedgedoc should be available. In local dev
   environment this is most likely `http://localhost:8080`.
5. Start the backend by running `yarn start:dev` for dev mode or `yarn start` for production.

## Setting up the frontend

The frontend can be run in four different ways. The development mode compiles everything on demand. So the first time
you open a page in the browser it may take some time.
See [here](setup/frontend.md) for a more detailed description of the environment variables for the frontend.

### Mocked backend

> To start the development mode run `yarn run dev`. If not configured otherwise the development mode will run in mock-mode

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To start the development mode, run `yarn run dev`. By default, this will run in mock-mode,
```

minimized and optimized for best performance. Don't edit the generated files in the `.next` folder by hand!

You can run the production build using the built-in server with `yarn start`.
You MUST provide the environment variable `HD_EDITOR_BASE_URL` with protocol, domain and (if needed) subdirectory path (
e.g. `http://localhost:3001/`) so the app knows under which URL the frontend is available in the browser.

If you use the production build then make sure that you set the environment variable `HD_EDITOR_BASE_URL` to the same
value as `HD_DOMAIN` in the backend.

### Production mock build

It is also possible to create a production build that uses the emulated backend by using `yarn build:mock`. This is
usually not needed except for demonstration purposes like `https://hedgedoc.dev`.

## Running backend and frontend together

To use backend and frontend together in development mode you'll need a local reverse proxy that combines both services
under one URL origin.
We recommend to use our pre-configured [caddy](https://caddyserver.com/) configuration.

### Running the reverse proxy

> 1. Download the latest version of caddy from [the caddy website](https://caddyserver.com/) or alternatively install it

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. Download the latest version of Caddy from [the Caddy website](https://caddyserver.com/) or alternatively install it
```

>    from the distributions' repository. You don't need any plugin. Place the downloaded binary in the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   using your package manager. You don't need any plugin. Place the downloaded binary in the
```

   directory `dev-reverse-proxy`. Don't forget to mark the file as executable using `chmod +x caddy`

> 2. Start the reverse proxy using `./caddy run` for local downloaded caddy or `caddy run` for system wide installation.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
2. Start Caddy using `./caddy run` (when you manually downloaded the binary) or `caddy run` (when you installed Caddy via a package manager)
```

# Getting started

To run Hedgedoc 2.0 you need three components: the backend, the frontend and the reverse proxy.

> Backend and Frontend are included in Hegdedoc repo. The reverse proxy can be chosen by preference. For development, we

Author: fixed

recommend caddy and the provided configuration.

> ## Local dev quick guide with real backend

Author: fixed

This describes the easiest way to start a local development environment. For other deployments follow the description
below.

> 1. Install node (at least Node 14, we recommend Node 18), yarn and caddy

Author: If there is caddy package in the repositories of your package manager. It is easier to install it from there.

2. Clone [repo](https://github.com/hedgedoc/hedgedoc.git) and go into directory
     ```shell
     git clone https://github.com/hedgedoc/hedgedoc.git
     cd hedgedoc
     ```

> 3. install dependency in repo root directory (`yarn install`) :hourglass_flowing_sand:

Author: removed. fixed

4. Go to `hedgedoc/commons` directory `cd ../commons`
5. Build commons (`yarn build`)
6. Goto `hedgedoc/backend` directory `cd ../backend`
7. Create `.env` by `cp .env.example .env`

> 8. Set session secret by `openssl rand -hex 16 | sed -E 's/(.*)/HD_SESSION_SECRET=\1/' >> .env`

Reviewer 2: > In dev mode you don't need a secure secret. So use any value.

So why do we use the complicated method here?

Author: fixed

9. Add the following lines
    ```shell
    echo "HD_AUTH_LOCAL_ENABLE_LOGIN=true" >> .env
    echo "HD_AUTH_LOCAL_ENABLE_REGISTER=true" >> .env
    ```
10. Start Backend by `yarn start:dev &`
11. Go to  `hedgedoc/frontend` directory `cd ../frontend`
12. Start Frontend by `yarn run dev:with-local-backend`
13. Go to `hedgedoc/dev-reverse-proxy` with `cd ../dev-reverse-proxy`

> 14. start Caddy `caddy run &`

Author: fixed

2. Execute `yarn build` to build the commons package.

## Setting up the Backend

The backend can be mocked instead. For mock backend see below in frontend.

1. Go into the `backend` directory.
2. Create an environment file. We recommend to use the example file by running `cp .env.example .env`
   You can modify this file according to the [configuration documentation](../config/index.md).
3. Make sure that you've set `HD_SESSION_SECRET` in your `.env` file. Otherwise, the backend won't start.
   > In dev mode you don't need a secure secret. So use any value. If you want to generate a secure session secret you
   can generate one using e.g. `openssl rand -hex 16 | sed -E 's/(.*)/HD_SESSION_SECRET=\1/' >> .env`.
4. Make sure that `HD_DOMAIN` in `.env` is set to the domain where Hedgedoc should be available. In local dev
   environment this is most likely `http://localhost:8080`.
5. Start the backend by running `yarn start:dev` for dev mode or `yarn start` for production.

## Setting up the frontend

The frontend can be run in four different ways. The development mode compiles everything on demand. So the first time
you open a page in the browser it may take some time.

> See [here](setup/frontend.md) for more detailed description of the environment variables for the frontend.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
See [here](setup/frontend.md) for a more detailed description of the environment variables for the frontend.
```

# Getting started

To run Hedgedoc 2.0 you need three components: the backend, the frontend and the reverse proxy.

> Backend and Frontend are included in the Hegdedoc repo. The reverse proxy can be chosen by preference. For development, we

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Backend and Frontend are included in the [HegdeDoc repo](https://github.com/hedgedoc/hedgedoc). The reverse proxy can be chosen by preference. For development, we
```

recommend caddy and the provided configuration.

## Quick guide for development setup

This describes the easiest way to start a local development environment. For other deployments follow the description
below.

1. Install node (at least Node 14, we recommend Node 18), [yarn](https://yarnpkg.com)
2. Install caddy (select one of the two options)
   - [download](https://caddyserver.com/) and place it in `hedgedoc/dev-reverse-proxy`
   - install from distribution repository
3. Clone [repo](https://github.com/hedgedoc/hedgedoc.git) and go into directory
     ```shell
     git clone https://github.com/hedgedoc/hedgedoc.git
     cd hedgedoc
     ```
4. install dependency in repo root directory (`yarn install`)
5. Go to `hedgedoc/commons` directory `cd ../commons`
6. Build commons (`yarn build`)
7. Goto `hedgedoc/backend` directory `cd ../backend`
8. Create `.env` by `cp .env.example .env`

> 9. Set session secret by `echo "DEBUG_TOKEN" | sed -E 's/(.*)/HD_SESSION_SECRET=\1/' >> .env`

Reviewer 3: This looks a bit as if "DEBUG_TOKEN" has a special meaning although it is just a random string.

> 9. Set session secret by `echo "DEBUG_TOKEN" | sed -E 's/(.*)/HD_SESSION_SECRET=\1/' >> .env`

Reviewer 3: Below we use this instead: `openssl rand -hex 16`

10. Add the following lines
     ```shell
     echo "HD_AUTH_LOCAL_ENABLE_LOGIN=true" >> .env
     echo "HD_AUTH_LOCAL_ENABLE_REGISTER=true" >> .env
     ```
11. Start Backend by `yarn start:dev &`
12. Go to  `hedgedoc/frontend` directory `cd ../frontend`
13. Start Frontend by `yarn run dev:with-local-backend`
14. Go to `hedgedoc/dev-reverse-proxy` with `cd ../dev-reverse-proxy`
15. start Caddy `caddy run` for system-wide installation or `./caddy run` for local installation
16. Use your browser to go to <http://localhost:8080>

## Preconditions

> If you want to run hedgedoc in dev mode some preconditions have to be met.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
If you want to run HedgeDoc in dev mode some preconditions have to be met.
```

1. Make sure that NodeJS is installed. You need at least Node 14 (we recommend Node 18).
2. Make sure that [yarn](https://yarnpkg.com/) is installed.
3. Clone this repo (e.g. `git clone https://github.com/hedgedoc/hedgedoc.git hedgedoc`)
4. Go into the cloned directory

## Installing the dependencies

Because we use yarn workspaces, yarn collects the dependencies of all packages automatically in one central top-level
node_modules folder.
To install the dependencies execute `yarn install` at the top level of the cloned repository.
Execute this command ONLY there. There is no need to execute the install-command for every package.
It's important to use [yarn](https://yarnpkg.com/). We don't support npm or any other package manager and using anything
else than yarn won't work.

> ## Compile Common Package

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
## Build `commons` package
```

> Some code is shared by backend and frontend. This code lives in the "common" package and needs to be compiled so

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Some code is shared by backend and frontend. This code lives in the "commons" package and needs to be built so
```

frontend and backend can import it.
This only needs to be done once, except if you've changed code in the commons package.

1. Go into the `commons` directory.
2. Execute `yarn build` to build the commons package.

> ## Setting up the Backend

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
## Setting up the backend
```

1. Go into the `backend` directory.
2. Create an environment file. We recommend to use the example file by running `cp .env.example .env`
   You can modify this file according to the [configuration documentation](../config/index.md).
3. Make sure that you've set `HD_SESSION_SECRET` in your `.env` file. Otherwise, the backend won't start.
   > In dev mode you don't need a secure secret. So use any value. If you want to generate a secure session secret you
   can generate one using e.g. `openssl rand -hex 16 | sed -E 's/(.*)/HD_SESSION_SECRET=\1/' >> .env`.
4. Make sure that `HD_DOMAIN` in `.env` is set to the domain where Hedgedoc should be available. In local dev
   environment this is most likely `http://localhost:8080`.
5. Start the backend by running `yarn start:dev` for dev mode or `yarn start` for production.

## Setting up the frontend

The frontend can be run in four different ways. The development mode compiles everything on demand. So the first time
you open a page in the browser it may take some time.
See [here](setup/frontend.md) for more detailed description of the environment variables for the frontend.

> ### Mocked Backend

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
### Mocked backend
```

# Getting started

> To run Hedgedoc 2.0 you need three components: the backend, the frontend and the reverse proxy.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
To run HedgeDoc 2.0 you need three components: the backend, the frontend and the reverse proxy.
```

Backend and Frontend are included in the [HegdeDoc repo](https://github.com/hedgedoc/hedgedoc). The reverse proxy can be chosen by preference. For development, we
recommend caddy and the provided configuration.

## Quick guide for development setup

This describes the easiest way to start a local development environment. For other deployments follow the description
below.

> To run Hedgedoc 2.0 you need three components: the backend, the frontend and the reverse proxy.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
To run HedgeDoc 2.0 you need three components: the backend, the frontend and the reverse proxy.
```

# Getting started

To run Hedgedoc 2.0 you need three components: the backend, the frontend and the reverse proxy.

Backend and Frontend are included in the [HegdeDoc repo](https://github.com/hedgedoc/hedgedoc). The reverse proxy can be chosen by preference. For development, we
recommend caddy and the provided configuration.

## Quick guide for development setup

This describes the easiest way to start a local development environment. For other deployments follow the description
below.
To run Hedgedoc 2.0 you need three components: the backend, the frontend and the reverse proxy.

Backend and Frontend are included in the [HegdeDoc repo](https://github.com/hedgedoc/hedgedoc). The reverse proxy can be chosen by preference. For development, we
recommend caddy and the provided configuration.

## Quick guide for development setup

This describes the easiest way to start a local development environment. For other deployments follow the description

> below.

Reviewer 2: See above.

1. Install Node.js (at least Node 14, we recommend Node 18) and [Yarn](https://yarnpkg.com/getting-started/install)
2. Install Caddy (select one of the two options)

>    - [Download](https://caddyserver.com/) and place the `caddy` binary in `hedgedoc/dev-reverse-proxy`. Ensure it is executable with `chmod +x caddy`

Reviewer 2: If you're on MacOS you also need to flag the file as "secure" because it has been downloaded from the internet and isn't signed.. There is a UI click way to do this, but the easiest way is to execute `xattr -d com.apple.quarantine ./caddy` in a terminal. If we have a extra hint for the executable flag then we should also mention this :shrug:

   - Install Caddy with you package manager
3. Clone [our repository](https://github.com/hedgedoc/hedgedoc.git) and go into its directory
     ```shell
     git clone https://github.com/hedgedoc/hedgedoc.git
     cd hedgedoc
     ```
4. Install the dependencies in repo root directory with `yarn install`
5. Go to `hedgedoc/commons` directory with `cd ../commons`
6. Build the commons package with `yarn build`
7. Goto `hedgedoc/backend` directory with `cd ../backend`
8. Create the `.env` config file by copying the example: `cp .env.example .env`
9. Add a value to `HD_SESSION_SECRET` in the .env file. This can be any string, which has to be a secure password for production but can be set to simple string for debug purpose.

> 10. Add the following lines

Reviewer 2: Add? To what?
Either you change the code below so the user gets instructed to add these lines to the `.env` file or you change "add" to "execute".

   ```shell
  echo "HD_AUTH_LOCAL_ENABLE_LOGIN=true" >> .env
  echo "HD_AUTH_LOCAL_ENABLE_REGISTER=true" >> .env
   ```

> 11. Start the backend using `yarn start:dev &`

Reviewer 2: Assuming that this quick start guide is also for beginners (indicated by the extra hint of `chmod` above) I would NOT send any process to the background!
I would rather recommend to start multiple terminals.......

12. Go to  `hedgedoc/frontend` directory with `cd ../frontend`

> 13. Start the frontend using `yarn run dev:with-local-backend`

Reviewer 2: ...... especially because the backend is started in background but the frontend is not...

14. Go to `hedgedoc/dev-reverse-proxy` with `cd ../dev-reverse-proxy`
15. Start Caddy using `./caddy run` (when you manually downloaded the binary) or `caddy run` (when you installed Caddy via a package manager)
16. Use your browser to go to <http://localhost:8080>

## Preconditions

If you want to run HedgeDoc in dev mode some preconditions have to be met.

1. Make sure that NodeJS is installed. You need at least Node 14 (we recommend Node 18).
2. Make sure that [Yarn](https://yarnpkg.com/) is installed.
3. Clone this repo (e.g. `git clone https://github.com/hedgedoc/hedgedoc.git hedgedoc`)
4. Go into the cloned directory

## Installing the dependencies

Because we use Yarn workspaces, Yarn collects the dependencies of all packages automatically in one central top-level
`node_modules` folder.
To install the dependencies execute `yarn install` at the top level of the cloned repository.
Execute this command ONLY there. There is no need to execute the install-command for every package.
It's important to use [Yarn](https://yarnpkg.com/). We don't support `npm` or any other package manager and using anything
else than Yarn won't work.

> ## Build `commons` package

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
## Build the `commons` package
```

Some code is shared by backend and frontend. This code lives in the "commons" package and needs to be built so
frontend and backend can import it.
This only needs to be done once, except if you've changed code in the commons package.

1. Go into the `commons` directory.
2. Execute `yarn build` to build the commons package.

## Setting up the Backend

The backend can be mocked instead. For mock backend see below in frontend.

> **Note:** The backend can be mocked instead of starting it for real. See the "Mocked backend" section below.

Reviewer 2: This is double information. Why do we mention it here anyway? That's more of a special case of the frontend.

3. Make sure that you've set `HD_SESSION_SECRET` in your `.env` file. Otherwise, the backend won't start.
   > In dev mode you don't need a secure secret. So use any value. If you want to generate a secure session secret you
   can use e.g. `openssl rand -hex 16 | sed -E 's/(.*)/HD_SESSION_SECRET=\1/' >> .env`.
4. Make sure that `HD_DOMAIN` in `.env` is set to the domain where Hedgedoc should be available. In local dev
   environment this is most likely `http://localhost:8080`.
5. Start the backend by running `yarn start:dev` for dev mode or `yarn start` for production.

## Setting up the frontend

The frontend can be run in four different ways. The development mode compiles everything on demand. So the first time
you open a page in the browser it may take some time.
See [here](setup/frontend.md) for a more detailed description of the environment variables for the frontend.

### Mocked backend

To start the development mode, run `yarn run dev`. By default, this will run in mock-mode,
The app should run now and be available under [http://localhost:3001](http://localhost:3001) in your browser.

> In development mode the app will autoload changes you make to the code.

Reviewer 2: What is the mock mode?

This task will automatically set `HD_EDITOR_BASE_URL` to `http://localhost:8080`.

### Production mode

Use `yarn build` to build the app in production mode and save it into the `.next` folder. The production build is
minimized and optimized for best performance. Don't edit the generated files in the `.next` folder by hand!

You can run the production build using the built-in server with `yarn start`.
You MUST provide the environment variable `HD_EDITOR_BASE_URL` with protocol, domain and (if needed) subdirectory path (
e.g. `http://localhost:3001/`) so the app knows under which URL the frontend is available in the browser.

If you use the production build then make sure that you set the environment variable `HD_EDITOR_BASE_URL` to the same
value as `HD_DOMAIN` in the backend.

### Production mock build

It is also possible to create a production build that uses the emulated backend by using `yarn build:mock`. This is
usually not needed except for demonstration purposes like `https://hedgedoc.dev`.

## Running backend and frontend together

To use backend and frontend together in development mode you'll need a local reverse proxy that combines both services
under one URL origin.

> We recommend to use our pre-configured [Caddy](https://caddyserver.com/) configuration.

Reviewer 4: I would leave it as is, because it's a general explanation. You don't want to through itemized lists at people from the get-go…

### Running the reverse proxy

1. Download the latest version of Caddy from [the Caddy website](https://caddyserver.com/) or alternatively install it
   using your package manager. You don't need any plugin. Place the downloaded binary in the

>    directory `dev-reverse-proxy`. Don't forget to mark the file as executable using `chmod +x caddy`

Reviewer 2: See above the note about macos.

> 2. Start Caddy using `./caddy run` (when you manually downloaded the binary) or `caddy run` (when you installed Caddy via a package manager).

Reviewer 2: see above
